#Abstract


Network meta-analyses (NMAs) are a representative of the indirect comparison methods class in the context of clinical trials. These are becoming increasingly important in data analysis in the absence of observations from controlled randomized trials of direct comparison of two or more treatment options. The statistical evaluation of NMAs is performed according to the guidelines of the National Institute for Health Care Excellence (NICE) using the WinBUGS software package. Since WinBUGS is not developed further, the software packages rjags, runjags, jagsUI and R2jags for JAGS; the functions nimbleModel() and readBUGSmodel() for NIMBLE as well as Stan were tested in this master thesis regarding their suitability as possible alternatives. The Blocker, Dietary Fat and Diabetes examples of the TSD2 document were translated into the programming languages of the alternatives and executed on R. Both the tested JAGS packages and the NIMBLE functions showed for the tested default settings and standard functions high similarities to the posterior summaries of the Blockers, Dietary Fat and Diabetes examples of the TSD2 document and are therefore all potential alternatives to WinBUGS. Regarding the handling, the tested economic and MCMC criteria as well as omitting Stan, the runjags package can be considered the most suitable alternative in the blocker example. For Stan, whose BUGS code must first be translated to C++ nomenclature, significant differences were noticed, which indicates an incorrect parameterization of the program codes.

The experiment concerning a hypothetical influence of the A-toxin on the growth of other microorganisms showed a possibility for transfering of NMAs to biotechnological applications. However, a direct transfer of the program codes is only possible in a very limited application area with constant consideration of a comparative value. The range of application could be extended by rewriting the program codes, so that NMAs for biotechnology offer an enormous potential for data evaluation but also for modulation and simulation.
